# BIOS_669_final
## Final Project for BIOS_669: Working with Data in a Public Health Setting

  Much like most conventional professional athletes, CrossFit athletes train year-round in hopes of competing at the highest level of competition, The CrossFit Games. Akin to the Superbowl or the World Series, the CrossFit Games (informally known as “The Games”) is intended to feature the most elite CrossFit athletes of that season. Throughout its 14-year tenure, The Games has evolved significantly through changes in leadership, location, and protocol. More recently, with more and more players competing at a high level, new pathways to qualify for the games had to be developed. In 2019, the CrossFit leadership instituted a dramatic shift to The Games qualification process. To begin the season, all (100,000+) athletes would compete in an online competition called “The Open.” The Open consisted of five events, with the top 20 athletes in each division qualifying directly for The CrossFit Games.  Following The Open, athletes who did not qualify could compete in one of many independently organized CrossFit “Sanctional” tournaments at some point during the season. An additional 100 athletes received an invitation to The Games from one of these events. Importantly, because of this dual qualification method, the 2019 CrossFit games featured 141 male and 129 female athletes, a much larger field than previous years. 

  This exceptionally large field of athletes forced the directors of The Games to institute several cuts to the field very early on in the competition. More specifically, over 100 athletes were cut over the course of the first half of The Games, with only 10% of the field remaining for the final six events. Athletes, viewers, and analysists were left questioning whether the cut system left an accurate reflection of the sport’s best. This was an especially charged topic since the top finishers received sizable monetary prizes. Therefore, this project attempted to use publicly available data about the 2019 CrossFit Open and Games to assess whether the 2019 CrossFit Games truly crowned the fittest men and women in the sport. More specifically, in using The Open as a benchmark for athletes’ fitness, this project assessed whether those standing on the podium were an accurate reflection of the sport’s best. 
	
  Data from the 2019 CrossFit Open and Games was directly downloaded from the data science hub, Kaggle. The data repository consisted of several distinct datasets on athlete characteristics, event scores, and open rankings. The datasets used in this analysis included (1) athletes at The Open, (2) athletes at The Games, and (3) The Games scores. Because over 100,000 individuals competed in the 2019 CrossFit Open, all datasets were subsetted to include only the top 100 ranked athletes in the male and female (non-scaled) divisions using R and The Slurm Workload Manager. The R and Slurm files can be found in the zip file. A supplemental file that included event names, numbers, and descriptions was generated using information from the CrossFit Games website. All datafiles were read into SAS On Demand. Files were joined using three key identifiers: (1) competitor id, (2) event number, (3) and event ordinal. 

